feat: add guide for verifying smart contracts using the RSK Explorer (#431)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/02-developers/05-smart-contracts/04-verify-smart-contracts/rootstock-explorer.md

---
sidebar_label: Verify a Smart Contract using the Rootstock Explorer
sidebar_position: 107
title: Verify a Smart Contract using the Rootstock Explorer

> description: "How to Verify a Smart Contract on the Rootstock Explore"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "How to Verify a Smart Contract on the Rootstock Explorer"
```

tags: [Explorer, tutorial, developers, quick starts, rsk, rootstock]
---

Contract verification is essential in the Rootstock ecosystem. It allows Rootstock Explorer users to inspect and validate the source code of deployed smart contracts.

The Rootstock Explorer provides a transparent view of the Rootstock blockchain, showing transactions, blocks, and deployed contracts. This transparency, enabled by verification, builds trust and understanding in decentralized applications.

> ## What does verification do?:

Reviewer: explain also that this is essential for security reasons for end users / developers to be able to validate if the smart contract doesn't have malicious code

Something like:

Smart contracts are verified to build trust by proving that the deployed bytecode on the blockchain matches the publicly visible source code, enabling users to inspect its functionality and security. Verification enhances transparency, allows developers to use specific tooling, and helps users avoid malicious contracts by making the code auditable. 

Key reasons for verifying a smart contract
Builds trust: Verification allows anyone to see the source code of a deployed smart contract, which fosters trust with users and the community.
Increases transparency: Users can audit the code to confirm it performs the actions it claims to, providing confidence in the contract's operations.
Aids in security: By making the code public, it can be reviewed for vulnerabilities, though users should still conduct their own security assessments.
Enables proper tooling: Many development and analysis tools, such as those from [Tenderly](https://docs.tenderly.co/contract-verification), require the contract's source code to be verified to function correctly.
Provides public interaction: Verification allows users to interact with the contract through block explorers like [Etherscan](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/WLRXsAZ-8VU), even if other user interfaces are unavailable.
Confirms code integrity: The verification process proves that the bytecode on the blockchain was generated from a specific, known source code, ensuring the contract hasn't been tampered with.
Helps with compliance: Verification is essential for meeting certain compliance and regulatory requirements.

- Provides a `Verified` badge on the contract page, indicating that the source code corresponds to the deployed bytecode.

> - Allows readable reading and writing of contract functions.

Reviewer: rephrase this

Author: this is ok?

- Adds a `Verified` badge to the contract page, confirming that the published source code matches the deployed bytecode.
- Enables human-readable interaction with the contract — allowing users to view and call its functions directly.

- Allows downloading the contract's Application Binary Interface (ABI).

## Prerequisites

- Address of the deployed contract on Rootstock.
- Complete source code of the contract.
- Compiler details:
  - Solc (Solidity Compiler) version.
  - Number of optimization runs.
- Constructor parameters (if applicable).
- Library addresses (if used).

> In summary, this guide will help you verify your smart contract, allowing you to leverage these benefits and contribute to a more transparent and trustworthy decentralized environment on Rootstock.

> ## Visit the Rootstock Explorer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Getting Started
```

> - To start the verification process go to the Rootstock Explorer [Testnet](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/) or [Mainnet](https://explorer.rootstock.io/), find your contract using the search field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To start the verification process, visit the [Rootstock Testnet Explorer](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/) or [Rootstock Mainnet Explorer](https://explorer.rootstock.io/), and find your contract using the search field.
```

![init](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/init.png)

- Once you reach your contract's address view, navigate to the "Contract" tab and click the "Verify Contract" button.

![verify](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/verify-btn.png)

> # Choosing Verification Method

Reviewer: If there are two methods for verification, the guide should walk through both verification methods separately, in different sections, and explain each method completely.

> # Choosing Verification Method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Choosing a Verification Method
```

Rootstock Explorer offers two main methods for contract verification:

- **Single File (Flattened)**: For simple contracts contained in a single file, where all imports have been "flattened" into a single file.
- **Multiple Files / Standard JSON** (Hardhat/Foundry/Truffle): For more complex projects with multiple files or those generated by development frameworks like Hardhat, Foundry.

![verify](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/methods.png)

> | **Verification Method** | **When to Prefer** | **Pros** | **Cons** |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Verification Method** | **Usage** | **Pros** | **Cons** |
```

|---------------------------|--------------------|-----------|-----------|

> | **Single File (Flattened)** | Small contracts, without complex imports or libraries. | Simple and fast for straightforward contracts. | Can be tedious to flatten large contracts or those with many dependencies. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Single File (Flattened)** | Small contracts, without complex imports or libraries. | Easy and fast for simple contracts. | Can be tedious to flatten large contracts or those with many dependencies. |
```

| **Multiple Files / Standard JSON** | Large projects, with dependencies, libraries, or generated by development frameworks. | Automatically handles imports and dependencies. | Requires exporting the Standard JSON file from your development environment. |

## Compiler Configuration

> It is crucial that the compiler configuration in the explorer exactly matches that used during the compilation of your contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure the compiler configuration in the explorer matches that used during the compilation of your contract.
```

- **Select Solc version**: Choose the Solc version you used to compile your contract.

![solc](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/solc-version.png)

- **Optimization**:
  - If you used optimization run when compiling/deploying, enable it during verification and set the same runs (default 200).
  - If you didn’t use optimization, leave it disabled and don’t enter any runs.

![runs](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/runs.png)

- **EVM Version**: Choose the appropriate EVM version.

![evm](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/evm.png)

## Source Code Input

> Provide your contract's source code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Provide the contract's source code.
```

- **Contract Name**:

>   - Enter the exact name of the contract you deployed. This is required so the verifier can match the correct bytecode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Enter the exact name of the contract deployed. This is required so the verifier can match the correct bytecode.
```

  ![name](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/contract-name.png)

- **Paste/Upload source code**:
  - Single File: upload the .sol file.
  ![sol](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/sol.png)
   - Standard JSON: Upload the standard-json file generated by your development framework.
  ![json](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/json.png)

> - **Constructor Arguments**:  You must enter constructor arguments separate by comma if you have more than one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Constructor Arguments**:  Enter the constructor arguments separated by comma if more than one.
```

  ![args](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/args.png)

- **Libraries**:

>   - If your contract uses libraries, provide their names and deployed addresses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - If your contract uses libraries, provide its name and deployed addresses.
```

Author: I'm no sure with this change. @owans

Reviewer 2: You can use the first @carlos-rsk

  ![lib](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/lib.png)

## Submit and Validate
Once you have entered all the details, click "Verify Contract".

- **Expected statuses**: The verification status will change from "Pending" to "Success" or "Failure".

> - **In case of success**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **On successful status**:
```

  a. You will see the `Verified` badge on the contract page.
  ![verified](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/verified.png)

  b. Source code tabs will be visible.
  ![tabs](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/tabs.png)

  c. You will be able to download the contract ABI.
  ![abi](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/abi.png)

  d. Contract read and write panels will be available.
  - **Read Methods**:
  ![contract-interaction](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/contract-interaction.png)
  - **Write Methods**:
  ![write](/img/developers/smart-contracts/rsk-explorer/write.png)

## Troubleshooting

> Here are some common problems and their solutions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some common errors and their solutions:
```

Reviewer 2: @carlos-rsk You can utilize this component for this section:

https://dev.rootstock.io/components/#accordion

- **Compiler version mismatch**:
  - Confirm the exact **Solc version** used to compile your contract.
  - Retrieve the version from your compilation artifacts.

- **Invalid constructor arguments**:
  - Verify the precise **encoding**, **order**, and **types** of your constructor arguments.

- **Library not found / address mismatch**:
  - Ensure **library names** match bytecode placeholders.
  - Add the correct **deployed addresses** for each library.

- **Optimization runs differ**:
  - Align the number of **optimization runs** with your compilation settings.

- **Flattening / import issues**:
  - Consider using the **Standard JSON** verification method to avoid path or flattening issues.

- **Proxy and Implementation**:
  - Verify the **implementation contract**.
  - Note any **proxy-aware UI** (if available) and how to link it.

> > 💡 **Tip:** If verification keeps failing, try matching the compiler settings directly from your Hardhat or Foundry build artifacts.

Reviewer 2: Add a Section for Resources and link to verifying smart contracts using [Blockscout](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/smart-contracts/verify-smart-contracts/foundry-blockscout/) and [Hardhat Plugin](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/smart-contracts/verify-smart-contracts/hardhat-verify-plugin/)

---

Contract verification is essential in the Rootstock ecosystem. It allows Rootstock Explorer users to inspect and validate the source code of deployed smart contracts.

The Rootstock Explorer provides a transparent view of the Rootstock blockchain, showing transactions, blocks, and deployed contracts. This transparency, enabled by verification, builds trust and understanding in decentralized applications.

Key reasons for verifying a smart contract

- **Builds trust**:
  - Verification allows anyone to see the source code of a deployed smart contract, which fosters trust with users and the community.
- **Increases transparency**: 
  - Users can audit the code to confirm it performs the actions it claims to, providing confidence in the contract's operations.
- **Aids in security**:
  - By making the code public, it can be reviewed for vulnerabilities, though users should still conduct their own security assessments.
- **Enables proper tooling**:
  - Many development and analysis tools, such as those from Tenderly, require the contract's source code to be verified to function correctly.
- **Provides public interaction**:

>   - Verification allows users to interact with the contract through block explorers like Etherscan, even if other user interfaces are unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Verification allows users to interact with the contract on the Rootstock Explorer.
```
